Takes a huge effort to stay out of it.
And society makes it very difficult for
you. Your work makes it very difficult
for you. There is a system that is
surrounding us that is almost closing
around us like a net. If we actually
step out of it for a minute [music] and
look at it from the outside, we've
become utterly dependent on this web of
technology that's around us.
Just how worried [music] are you about
where technology is taking the human
race?
Well, I [music] have bad news. My guest
this week says you're not nearly worried
enough. This is the war [music] against
human nature. I think the internet is a
giant Ouija board. We're creating God.
We're building God. We're replacing God.
[music] He's so worried that he
retreated to the west of Ireland with
his family to escape what he calls the
machine.
But now he's returned to civilization
bearing a prophecy of doom. Paul
Kingsnorth is a novelist, critic,
[music] and environmental activist. And
his new book is entitled Against the
Machine [music] on the unmaking of
humanity.
Paul Kingsnorth, welcome to Interesting
Times. Thank you very much. I think
that's a a good thing. I'm not sure.
Well, we'll find out. But we're going to
start
with your life because you don't just
critique technological civilization, you
have also at least somewhat withdrawn
from it. You're here in New York City
promoting this book, but once book
promotion is done, you will return to
western
Ireland
where you have lived for some time with
your wife and children.
Can you tell me about that?
Well, I live on a few acres of land in a
little house in County Galway in
Ireland. You can probably tell from my
accent that I don't come from Ireland. I
come from England. I grew up in urban
England. I worked there for a long time.
I lived there for a long time, but both
my wife and I, well, when you have
children, it really focuses you
on the shape of the world, the stories
you want to tell them, the life you want
to live. And we we were quite clear for
a long time that we wanted to try and
escape the machine, escape the rat race
if we could. And we wanted to homeschool
our children. We wanted to teach them
ourselves. We wanted to give them some
time in nature. We wanted to take them
away from the screens which are
enveloping absolutely every aspect of
education and life for children.
So, we kind of jumped ship. We left
England and we moved to rural Ireland as
a kind of a life experiment. We wanted
to grow food. We wanted to try to be
semi-self-sufficient, try to be rooted
in a place. So, that's what we've been
doing for about 12 years. Yeah, and
we're still at it. And it's uh it's been
it's been pretty glorious actually
considering that we
kind of jumped in with both feet to see
what would happen.
>> How old are your kids now? They're 14
and 17 now, so
>> So, they were very young. They were very
young when we moved out there, yeah,
three and six, I think. And so, you've
been homeschooling them and farming.
Tell me about the farming. Well, it's
it's small holding. It's what you would
call homesteading, I think, rather than
farming. We have a vegetable garden. We
have some orchards. We grow our own
firewood. Do you have Do you have
electricity? We do have electricity,
yeah.
I'd really like to go off grid, but we
haven't managed to do that, but maybe in
the future. And you mentioned getting
away from screens, the tyranny, the
omnipresence of screens.
But you don't just write books from your
rural retreat. You also have a Substack.
How do you navigate your own
relationship to to the internet? Is
there like an internet hour? It's like a
constant battle. I mean, I actually have
a little cabin out in the in our field
that I
have an internet connection in. I can go
out there and kind of write and leave my
computer there and come back into the
house and sort of force myself away from
it. And I don't do social media. I don't
have a smartphone. So, and that's not
because I'm highly virtuous. It's
because I know that if I did, I'd be on
it all the time like everyone else is
because, you know, that's how it works.
And we do it with our children. They've
never had phones and they have laptops
now for school, but, you know, there
hours when they can use them and hours
when they can't. And I think it's a good
thing, you know, it's a it can sound
like it's very puritanical and
restrictive and, you know, you're
forcing people not to do things,
but it's liberating actually in a way,
you know, very liberating for children.
They have more freedom to actually be
young people. Is there a shock to
coming back to civilization? Like you're
on book tour through the United States.
You're here
in Manhattan near Times Square. You
know, this is the belly of the beast. Do
you feel
assaulted
by the
tech in the world? Or is it Or is it
more I can't do I feel more and more
assaulted. I mean, like I said, I grew
up I was I was I lived in greater London
till I was 11. I grew up in cities. I
was lived in Oxford in England for a
long time. It's not as big as New York,
but, you know, I've I've been in plenty
of cities.
So, it's not it's not a shock to come to
a city. Um
it's a bit of an assault on the senses
when you live out in rural Ireland,
certainly.
But it is interesting how much more
technological and screen-based
everything is. I mean, I just drove
through Times Square on the way here.
Um and I have been there before, but
just the sheer number of flashing
lights, the sheer number of screens, you
know, huge billboards of virtually naked
women, technology everywhere. But also
the reality that that no one's looking
at that. I mean, what's interesting to
me is that do you have these huge
flashing screens, but everyone's walking
through Times Square staring down at
their phone.
>> It's kind to me it always seems like a
revolutionary situation because this has
only been going on for 10 or 15 years. I
think the iPhone was first sold in 2007.
Not long ago at all.
Um and we've very very quickly got into
this situation where everyone's staring
down at the screen if they're not
surrounded by screens. Takes a huge
effort to stay out of it. And society
makes it very difficult for you. Your
work makes it very difficult for you.
Um and this is really what I'm That's
what I'm talking about when I talk about
the machine. It's what I'm trying to
write about in this book. There is a
system that is surrounding us that is
almost closing around us like a net. If
we actually step out of it for a minute
and look at it from the outside, we've
become utterly dependent on this web of
technology that's around us. It's a
radical situation and it's a very
strange one and it's been normalized
because it's just happened so steadily.
And yet at the same time, almost
everyone has a level of discomfort about
it. So, let's go a little further with
with definitions here.
The machine
is the iPhone, but it's not just the
iPhone. It is the internet, but it's not
just the internet. You said it's a net
that's been closing around us for a long
time.
Give me a history of the machine. So,
this this phrase the machine is not my
phrase. It's very deliberately lifted
from greater writers of the past. It's a
It's a It's a word that writers from
Mary Shelley onwards for 200 years, at
least since the dawn of the Industrial
Revolution, poets, writers, artists,
filmmakers have been using
to try and get some kind of grip on this
system that's been building around us
since we first invented the steam
engine.
I think the technologies we're talking
about here, the phones and the screens
and whatever else we're using,
are not so much the machine as a
manifestation of it. The machine is is a
giant technological, economic, cultural
system which actually stems from a
particular way of seeing, a peculiarly
modern way of seeing
in which we
move away from the relationship to
culture that we had in the past, the
relationship to nature, and especially
the relationship to religion, the
relationship to God.
And we
take the scientific revolution, we take
the Enlightenment, we take the
technological and the industrial
revolutions,
and they become
almost a new theology. It's really
ultimately a war against nature
including human nature using technology.
So, we've got to the point now where
this this thing that's called that we
might call the machine is closing around
us to such a degree that we feel like
cogs in it, but it's very difficult to
take us out of it. And it's moving
towards very openly
um a situation in which we are trying to
conquer death, um abolish disease,
uh terraform new planets, recreate the
whole of nature, create artificial food,
um replace our bodies with technology,
and effectively behave as if we were
gods using technology to build a new
world. So, that's what we're doing. So,
I want to get in a minute to possible
defenses, I suppose, of the machine, to
offer arguments on behalf of the changes
you've described.
But first, I want to take up the idea
that's
sometimes implicit, sometimes explicit
in your writing, right? Which is that
this is a path to destruction in the
end. And it seems to me that there are
sort of two intertwined visions of that
destruction in your book and in your
arguments. One is a vision essentially
of kind of dehumanization and
imprisonment of human beings sort of
trapped permanently in the machine and
you losing something essential
about their humanity.
And the second is a vision of ecological
destruction. And I want to try and take
those
each in turn, those those ideas. We can
bring them together, too, if you want.
But
you've been a writer your whole life,
but early on you were also an
environmental
activist. Can you talk a little bit just
about the relationship between the
machine and nature?
Yeah, it was really a love of nature
that took me into all of these inquiries
in the first place. I used to go on long
walks with my dad when I was young and
moving out of the suburbs and up into
the mountains really gave me a sense of
something that I hadn't experienced
before, and that drove me into
environmental activism and and
environmental writing for a long time.
Um I think there's something deeply
unholy and sacrilegious and destructive
about a culture that can ravage the
natural world to the degree that we're
ravaging it now.
And I think that if you have managed to
change the climate of an entire planet,
if you've managed to destroy its
forests,
if you've managed to poison its oceans
with plastic, if you've managed to kick
off the sixth mass extinction, and
that's the situation we're in.
And it's the this thing we call the
machine that is doing that, this global
economic industrial system that's doing
that.
Then you've got a major problem in your
relationship with the natural world.
What do you make of the argument that
the only way to avoid
actual destruction
is itself technological?
Right? In the sense that there's always
been kind of a divide in the
environmentalist movement between people
offering
the kind of thoroughgoing critique of
modern civilization that that you're
offering, right? And people who are
saying,
"Look, we've our technology has created
problems and we need to find
technological fixes and that means
electric cars, it means wind power, it
means solar power, alternative forms of
energy, all of these things. And that
only out of that can you stave off
you know, the worst case climate
scenarios.
>> Yeah, I have
>> So, I've been writing and thinking about
it for a long time.
When the green movement began, it was
very much focused on sort of back to the
land solutions.
Living a life, changing society so that
it became much more simple and much less
materialistic. That didn't happen.
Very clearly the direction of travel is
towards more machine all the time.
And so, the green movement has
effectively now become a movement which
promotes at least in the mainstream
these technological solutions for
perfectly rational reasons. I mean, it's
we're we're not going to stop climate
change by
all living simple lives on farms, by
turning off the industrial machine.
That's clearly not happening. So, it
makes logical sense to say
great. Okay, well, we we we need wind
farms and we need solar panels. And to
some degree, that's a good idea. I mean,
it's a it's a good idea to use wind
farms and solar panels instead of
burning coal, very clearly. Um if we're
going to have advanced technology, we
need to make it as sustainable as
possible.
But, we're also getting to the point
where the green movement is embracing
things which I would regard as quite
dehumanizing and unnatural. For example,
the replacement of farming with that
grown food, which is becoming
fashionable in some sort of green tech
quarters.
And again, you come back to the question
of what are our limits here? Where do we
actually stop? What do we mean by
sustainability? Do we Do we mean
sustaining the progress of machine
civilization just without producing
carbon in a way that is not ecological?
Or do we mean a a society which actually
is culturally and ecologically
sustainable where we can live human
lives? Can we have a kind of green
dehumanization, if you like? I think
potentially you could. I mean, it seems
to me and you can tell me if this is
wrong that
there's been a shift in your writing and
emphasis
over the years. You know, you were
sort of a
pantheist, Zen Buddhist, you practiced
Wicca for a while. Uh and then you
converted to capital O Orthodox
Christianity.
And
maybe tracking with that
conversion, I feel like you've you still
have the strong emphasis on the
environment and ecology.
But, maybe there's more emphasis on what
happens to the human mind and the human
soul under these under technological
conditions.
Yeah, I think that's probably true. I
mean, as you as you say, I've been on a
kind of long and very winding spiritual
search for about 15 years, which
ultimately ended up in me becoming an
Orthodox Christian, which is something I
wouldn't have predicted a decade ago. Um
but since arriving there, the pattern of
everything makes a lot more sense.
I think my
concern for the for the kind of the
destruction of the natural world, which
was very profound for a long time,
very intense.
I think you're right. I think it has it
hasn't disappeared,
but somehow it's subsided a little since
I became a Christian. I think partly
that's because
if you become a Christian,
it isn't possible to be
it isn't possible to be a catastrophist
in quite the same way because
if you're a Christian, you don't believe
everything ultimately is in the hands of
humanity. There's an end point to
history. Um
there's there's something or someone who
is bigger than us. Whereas, if you're if
you have a more materialist worldview,
if you have more atheist or even
agnostic worldview, and this is one of
the things that drives the green
movement. There's a great sense of fear
because you think, oh no, look at look
at all this destruction we're carrying
out and it's all on us and we have to
control it. We have to manage it.
There's nothing bigger than us. There's
no pattern to the history.
If we don't stop the climate changing,
we're all dead. If we don't stop the
forests falling, we're all dead. There
can't be any any outside intervention in
that, if you like. There's no bigger
pattern.
And because [snorts] I do now see what I
regard as a bigger pattern,
it's not that I don't care about those
things, I do.
But, as you say, I'm I'm more concerned,
I suppose, now, just maybe in the last 5
to 10 years with
the dehumanization of us as people. Um
and that's also partly because of the
rapid acceleration of of technology and
especially the rapid acceleration and
the arrival of AI,
which is another quantum leap in the in
the kind of the direction of the
machine, if you like.
And if AI systems are able to do even
half of what their boosters say they're
going to be able to do in the next 5
years,
then they're going to make smartphones
look like, you know, bowl of cornflakes
or something. It's going to be a radical
radical change, even deeper
alienation not from not just other
people and the world around us, but from
ourselves, from our understanding of
what it even means to be a human.
And I think that when we start to talk
about creating artificial life, creating
new intelligences, uploading our minds,
all the stuff that comes out of the
Silicon Valley
um
theology, if you like, at the moment,
that's where we are. This is the war
against human nature, which is presented
as the next stage in progress.
So, let me now
try and
make a case for modernity, just just for
a minute, because you mentioned the
Christian idea of directionality in
history. From a Christian perspective,
which is part of where the modern
narrative of progress came from, right,
in the first place. We aren't just stuck
in endless cycles, right? We're actually
going somewhere, there's a destination.
And one one reading of the last 200
years as a kind of counterpoint to your
own would be to say, basically,
of course, modern technology is
incredibly dangerous and has all kinds
of downsides. And the story of modernity
is a story of invention followed by
constant battles to tame
the machine and make it serve human
beings rather than the other way around.
Out of this struggle, you get
atomic bombs and, you know, poison gas
in World War I, but you also get, you
know, vaccines, airplanes, you know,
whatever whatever miracle of modern
science someone happens to appreciate
and favor, right? And in that case, this
moment with the smartphone, the digital
life, is just another it's another
moment where of course the peril is
great,
but
the point is to struggle to master the
thing, not to say the whole process of
was a mistake. What do you make of that
kind of Yeah.
>> part part King's North, part Pangloss.
No, no, so I mean, this this is this is
the argument and
to some degree, it's possible to look
back on on this and, you know, you can
look way back beyond the modern period
in the West to the Roman Empire or to
the
uh the the civilization of Pharaonic
Egypt and you can see these giant
technological civilizations rising and
falling. So, in that way, this this
thing called the machine is not just
something that's popped up in the last
few hundred years here.
It's part of our human psyche in some
way, something that emerges at different
places in history and rises and falls
and disappears.
If you wanted to look at it from a
Christian perspective, um another way
you could look at it is by opening the
Bible and going to the first chapter of
Genesis and seeing what happens in the
garden when God tells us to
exist [snorts]
to tend and keep the creation he's given
us. And we choose instead to eat this
fruit which gives us the knowledge of
good and evil because the serpent tells
us that if we do, we can be as gods.
And we choose to be as gods. And we then
fall out of relationship with God and
out of relationship with creation
creation and into civilization. And the
next thing you know, we're building the
Tower of Babel. Right. We're trying to
build this great technological the first
Cain built the first city. Cain builds
Cain builds the first city and before we
know it, we've got the first global
civilization building a tower to the
stars and God has to scatter us. And it
ended badly. And it doesn't end well.
So, I mean, there are two ways of
looking at it, if you want to look at it
from that perspective.
>> But, but in the same or in the same
beginning of Genesis, God also tells
people to be fruitful and multiply and
fill the earth and depending on your
translation, subdue it, right? And so,
there's some tension there where yes,
we ate the fruit of the tree and that
means that our building
our stewardship is not what it should
be, but does it remove the It certainly
doesn't remove the impulse to build and
create, right? Like
it's not clear that God just wanted us
to live in the garden forever.
>> so what's the obligation? That's the
question. So, what's the obligation? Um
clearly,
you know, if you would step back into a
a kind of circular way of looking at it,
there's no way of being human without
technology or tools. As soon as we are
human, we are building, we are making
fires. We are even language, we are
creating complex language, which is a
tool. We're using sticks to dig holes in
the ground.
It's technology and our ability to
create it which allows us to literally
fill the earth. The there are humans on
every continent, including Antarctica.
And so, in that sense, our relationship
to technology is not something that you
can retreat from or go back from or hide
from. The question is, what does the
technology serve?
What What are the tools doing? What
should your relationship with nature and
with God and with society and culture
be? And the big question for me
is there a point at which you can stop
and say, actually, we're not going to go
any further in that direction. We're not
going to do that. Could we have
stopped before the atom bomb was
developed and said, actually, we know
where that knowledge will lead us, so we
won't develop that thing. Could we stop
now? I mean, this is a big crunch point.
Huge numbers of people warning against
the further development of AI systems,
including most disturbingly, many of the
people creating them. They're the ones
who are warning most loudly about where
the systems will take us. So, Sir
Geoffrey Hinton, the British so-called
godfather of AI, he thinks there's
probably a 20% chance that the
development of AI will lead to total
human extinction. Right? So, he's the
guy who created it. It's not just
weirdos like me on podcasts No, no, that
that that perspective has been aired on
this very podcast. This is not unusual.
So, the people creating these things are
saying we have to stop doing it. So, our
our our question now as human beings is,
are we foresighted enough to be able to
say, no, we're not going to go that way.
We're going to go this way instead.
I don't know because so much of this is
driven by profit. And so much of it is
just driven by the
the kind of telos of the people creating
these things who seem to be taking us in
a in a inhuman direction.
>> But it's but it's also driven, right, by
the actual some of the actual
experiences of technological progress
that people feel have been
gifts for pretty obvious reasons having
to do with health, well-being, and
survival before they get to the phase of
welcoming the iPhone I agree.
So, what is Let me ask you this. What is
the healthy stage of
our society or any society's
relationship to
tool making, tech,
invention? Is there a period in time
where you would say, "Okay,
that society is getting it right
that then slips away as the machine
takes over?" That's a very good
question. Um
I mean, the case I'm trying to make here
is not that you point to a particular
stage in the past and say, "Well, that
was all wonderful. Let's go back there."
Um and you're right.
>> Which can't be done. It can't be done
anyway, so it doesn't matter. Um but
it's also not the point and there's no
doubt at all that as you say, at the
most basic level, there have been
obvious great improvements in people's
lives um
including in the house I live in, which
would not have been the the same place
100 years ago.
So, that is that is ultimately the
question. Is there a point at which you
can say things were working here
and we shouldn't have gone any further?
I maybe maybe there is
>> Well, not even that you shouldn't have
gone any further, but that
something you can aim for.
>> a cultural mode where you say, "This
society is inventing things and relating
to them in a way
that is good where you can trust them
with the power of invention." Like you
at one point you cite Oswald Spengler,
the great doom-ridden German philosopher
of 1910s to 1920s. And he has sort of a
vision of history, right, where
societies you have healthy cultures
that give way to decadent machine-like
civilizations and then fall and the
cycle starts again. What was the healthy
culture of the Western world?
Well, um
So, here's the thing. Um everything's an
exchange, okay? So,
there is no
there is no point at which you have
a healthy culture that does not have
negatives to it. So, the question maybe
is what the exchange is. So, today we
have if we're lucky enough to be
middle-class people in the Western world
and not people in Africa digging up the
cobalt for the phones we're having to
use every day, which is always worth
emphasizing, all of this stuff comes
with a huge cost, not just an
environmental cost,
much of the stuff we're actually buying
in a city like this is literally
manufactured by slaves in factories
somewhere in in the East or in Africa
who we don't have to see. There's always
an exchange. So, we have a certain level
of comfort, which most of us don't want
to give up,
but there's a price to pay for that. Uh
the same thing would be true of
I don't know, living in a in a situation
100 years ago where people were living
more simply, perhaps living living a
materially poorer existence. The
exchange they would be making is
in some cases at least, they would have
a stronger community, they would have a
closer relationship to nature, they
would have a clearer religion, they
would have a a simpler life,
but the exchange they would be making is
they would be less materially rich. So,
I mean, I really am
if I were to if I were to answer the
question, I would try to say, "Well, I
mean, let me answer it by the the way I
tried to answer it in the book."
It's okay to say
the High Middle Ages got some things
right [sighs] I know that without saying
we want We don't want to go back to the
13th century and so on, but it's okay to
say it. If we're talking about the West,
so yeah, I mean, if I were to look at
say England, I would be looking at
pre-modern England and I would say,
"Okay, in pre-modern England to a great
degree, despite all the
general
uh problems that you have in people's
everyday lives, you have a situation in
which people have a strong religious
organization, they have a sense of
meaning, they're a Christian society,
they have a sense of direction, they
have real communities, um
and they have a sense of who they are
and they have a relationship to nature.
So, again, as I say in the book, I
try to define what actually makes a real
culture and I come up with this
formulation that I call the four P's,
which are people, place, prayer, and the
past. And I think those are the four
legs on which the stool of a real
culture is built on. So, you have
people, that's your community, you have
place, that's the place you live in, the
place you come from, perhaps,
the relationship you have to the natural
world, then you have prayer, that's your
relationship to God, and you have the
past, which is where you come from and
where your stories come from, which you
want to pass on to your children. So,
I don't know, if I were to look at
England, I would say,
you know, before
even before the Industrial Revolution,
all those things were virtually intact,
despite all the various problems you
might have in your everyday life.
Um in the book, I try to identify where
the machine begins. I look at the way
the people's land was taken away from
them. Right. They were forced into the
cities. Capitalism begins to develop.
This is 1600s and 1700s.
>> 1600s onwards. By the 1900s, it's it's
very well developed and the English
ruling class can then take that model
out into the world, out into the
colonies, and impose it on everyone
else. So, you enclose people's land, you
enclose their lives, you make them
powerless.
So, anytime before that is a time which,
despite all the problems you have,
and we all know about them, um you have
a sense of living in a real culture in a
real place. I mean, it's interesting, if
I talk to my elderly neighbors in
Ireland
about what life used to be like there,
right? They'll readily concede that it
was poorer and they like not being so
poor.
Um but also, almost instantly, they will
talk about the complete collapse of
community in the place that they live
in. The fact that they knew all the late
neighbors and now they don't know
anybody. Nobody goes visiting anyone's
houses anymore.
Um the the the abundance of nature has
been destroyed by mechanized farming. Um
the traditions the folk traditions have
gone. Nobody goes to the church anymore.
So, you can on the one hand say, "Well,
look, they're they're warmer and better
off than they were before and they've
got a wider variety of food." But
they've lost a huge number of the things
that it makes that that that actually
make being human meaningful. And I think
it's very easy to look at that and say,
"Well, that's just romanticizing the
past." Because the things that make
human life meaningful are not as easily
measured. You know, we can have
statistics on
poverty relief and we can have
statistics on how much economic growth
has been and how much more GDP we have
and how we you know, we've all got a
house full of televisions and iPhones
and cars that we didn't have 50 years
ago and therefore we're wealthier.
But culturally and spiritually, we're
not wealthier in most cases. There's
been a huge decline. So, that's the
exchange.
I'm I'm guess I'm interested in
within that idea of exchange, an idea of
of balance, right? I think about this in
terms of America
America we we you know, we were born in
the machine in some ways, right? Like
the period you're describing is the
period when America began. We've always
been a technological republic.
And so, there's no you know, there's no
medieval past for Americans to look back
on. We have to live in a world where
we're trying to find
balance, right?
Does America want balance, though?
Or does America always move forward? I
think America always moves forward. It's
a modern It's a modern society.
It was It's an enlightenment culture. I
mean, to go back to Spengler you
mentioned or someone like the British
historian Arnold Toynbee, um who's
writing at a similar period in time,
their models, both of them,
um
they posit this cyclical nature of
civilizations, right? There was always a
rise and fall.
Um I'm quite convinced by that model. I
think that's whether or not it has a
mathematical basis, that's what
societies tend to do. So, I'm not sure
that humans are actually capable of
getting to the point where they say,
"Okay, we've got a good balance here.
We've got this I I don't think
>> Can you have a balance of uh a really
rooted culture with a relationship to
nature and God that also has iPhones in
its pocket? That's the question. That
Well, that's the that is the concrete
question right now.
The general question, though, is
if if you accept a cyclical story and
you wake up and you realize not only am
I in the middle of my life, but I'm in
the middle of the
phase in civilizational history when
things are going bad.
>> Hm. And you know,
is it just all over? Are you just
sitting around waiting for
the fall? Or can you This is something I
think about a lot. Can you
just in terms of religion, right? Like
the United States of America. Yes, we're
a you know, sort of capitalist liberal
society and so on. We're also a society
that has its own internal arcs of
religiosity. We have great awakenings,
we have revivals, we have falloffs,
secularization, then we get another
revival and so on, right? And
like can you look at 21st century
America and say,
"Okay, we seem to be in this decadent
phase, but maybe we can have religious
revival or if you're not religious,
civic revival or something. Can we Can
we avoid the collapse?" is what I'm
asking.
>> Well, I actually think those two things
are quite closely related. So, I'm a
member of the Orthodox Church. I know a
lot of Orthodox people in America. I was
just at a monastery in upstate New York
two days ago. There's a huge revival in
an interest in Orthodox Christianity
here, especially amongst young men,
interestingly. Huge numbers of young men
coming into the church. Same is true of
parts of the Catholic Church. Same is
true where I live in Ireland and in
England, there's a very clear evidence
of uh
huge uptick, well, not huge, but very
significant uptick in Christianity,
which would never have been predicted
five or six years ago.
Um I mean, Christianity in particular is
a religion which actually flourishes
best when things are collapsing, in my
opinion. I think Christianity does worse
when it is powerful and comfortable.
It's a society It's It's a religion
which grew out of
a collapse. Um the first Christians had
to live through the collapse of the
Roman Empire. The Irish monks and the
the monks in other parts of of places
like England who kept the Christian
faith going and kept the books hidden
and took them out into the to the
culture after the barbarian invasions,
they built Christendom. Christendom
actually works or comes from or
Christianity works and comes from and
flourishes best at a time of collapse.
A lot of people find the kind of stuff I
I talk about extremely depressing. I
don't find it depressing. I find it in
some ways quite exciting because we are
where we are. And everyone might have a
different analysis of where we are. Talk
to I don't know, talk to a guy in
Silicon Valley, he'll say everything's
terrific, the singularity's coming,
we're moving in the right direction.
Talk to a doomer like me,
I think we're dehumanizing ourselves and
destroying the natural world.
But
to me, a realization of the fact that
we're in a revolutionary
gives us a chance to actually say,
"Well, what's actually true? What's
real? What do we actually want to do?
How do we want to build societies? What
do we want to do in our own lives? What
relationship do we want to have with
technology?
Should I be going back to church? What
do I want to teach my children? It's at
times when things seem to be collapsing
or crumbling when all the new shoots
come up, which actually is also another
story of America, I think, that happens
repeatedly.
And it happens things seem to be falling
apart and then something grows again.
And that's certainly the story of the
Christian church over the last 2,000
years. I I completely agree with that.
I do wonder though,
in in the in the traditional cycles of
civilization story, right? What brings
things down in the end is
barbarian invasion, right? But
in your
in your storytelling about
the internet, like
it also seems like
you know, you use the the phrase
Faustian, right? To describe the bargain
that our civilization has has made,
right? Well, Faust, you know, he gets he
gets everything he wants
and then he gives up his soul and goes
to hell.
Right?
>> Mhm.
So,
is
let's just be supernaturalist for a
minute, right? Like
the internet is not the Huns, it's not
the Mongols,
right? But is it
the devil?
Sometimes I think the internet is a
giant Ouija board. And we use it to
summon things and things appear through
it. So, if you want to be
supernaturalist about it, I do. If you
want to be Christian about it, the world
is inherited by powers and
principalities and demonic forces which
have it in for us and which want to turn
us away from God. That's their purpose.
I think if C.S. Lewis was writing The
Screwtape Letters today, there would be
a good few letters about
how the demons can use the internet, how
they can use the phones,
um how they can use this to completely
delude us and distract us and take us
away from from our true purpose. There's
a couple of chapters in the book in
which I speculate quite openly about
this. And I've done it in other parts of
my writing, especially in fiction as
well, because I think there's something
very spiritually dark about the
internet, actually. I mean, just on a
practical level, you know, we see
chatbots persuading teenagers to kill
themselves, we have all sorts of dark,
horrible stuff going on.
But there's something about um
the very deliberate drive to
as as our Silicon Valley overlords say,
to create God, to make God. I mean, the
book is full of quotes from these people
about what they're doing and it's openly
theological. We're creating God, we're
building God, we're replacing God.
We're creating machines that will uh be
will have a spirituality to them.
Um that's where we're going. So, we have
a sense that what we're doing with the
internet is not simply using a bunch of
ones and zeros to give us a lot of stuff
we want,
but actually creating a
a new a new religion, actually, a new
spiritual worldview in which we are
going to upload our minds, we are going
to live forever, and the
in the process of trying to create an
artificial intelligence, the question
that haunts me
is are we creating these things or are
we summoning them?
Okay? So, is it is it possible that the
machines we've made
are actually being inhabited by
something else?
Is this just a mess we've made with our
technology or is there something that's
actually working on our minds through
it?
Um
which occasionally can keep you up at
night.
We had I had Peter Thiel on this
podcast. Um
>> [clears throat]
>> entrepreneur, technologist, um
religious believer of a distinctive
kind. And we talked about the
Antichrist.
And
Thiel's argument is that the Antichrist
is likely to deliver peace and safety
and promise to freeze everything in
place and just protect people. That the
that the Antichrist would be in the end
an enemy of technological progress.
I think it's safe to say that you have
roughly the opposite perspective and
that what you are describing is
the Antichrist coming in the form of a
technological solution Mhm. to all of
human nature? I think Peter Thiel's
trying to get us to look in the wrong
direction, probably quite deliberately.
I think Peter Thiel only came out a few
days ago and said that he thought that
regulating AI would lead to the rise of
Antichrist precisely for that reason.
Um
Is Antichrist going to be a person or is
Antichrist going to be a machine? Is
Antichrist going to be a being that we
create or that comes through the things
that we have created? That's the
question. I think people like Peter
Thiel are involved in building something
which
is becoming quite openly evil, I think.
Becoming quite openly destructive of
human flourishing, destructive of
nature, destructive of our
relationships, destructive in all the
ways that we've talked about.
Um
so
I think what's fascinating with these
kind of
billionaires who are involved in
creating weapon systems and surveillance
technology, who are also talking from a
Christian perspective,
I mean, I find that utterly bizarre. I
think that the constant progress of the
technological system at the moment, the
direction it's going in is going to lead
to
and is already leading to the rise of a
being or beings which are
a very Antichrist-like in their in in
their in their functioning. I mean, the
promise of Antichrist in the Christian
story is that he or it
is a great prophet which imitates
Christ.
You know, every every religious believer
thinks this is the new prophet who's
come to unite a world which is
crumbling. That's the promise that
technology is giving us at the moment.
That's the promise that we're being
openly given by the people who are
creating these
these great superhuman intelligences,
these great beyond human minds that
they're trying to build. These things
are going to bring us together. These
things are going to solve our problem.
These things will be rational. These
things will overcome our human passions
and our destruction. These things will
unite us. It's almost as if the
technological system is coalescing and
as I say, the Silicon Valley people talk
openly about this. It's coalescing
towards the creation of a being
which is seen to be and is promised to
be our salvation. And when they start to
talk about
um uploading their minds into the
silicon substrate, you've got a you've
got a effectively kind of digital
Christian heresy going on. You've got a
you've got Christianity without Christ.
We create heaven. We we we create um a
place in which we can live eternal lives
and we ultimately create beings which we
regard as gods.
One thing that I would say that sort of
some of the people in Silicon Valley,
like Thiel included, have for a long
time complained that technological
progress has focused so exclusively on
the digital, um on the virtual, right?
And they'll say things Thiel's famous
line was, you know, we got we were
promised flying cars and we got Twitter
and so on. And obviously Elon Musk wants
to build rockets to get into space. Jeff
Bezos wants to do the same thing.
I see a distinction between
technological impulses.
I think that
building rockets to go into space is
okay. Not only is it okay, it might even
be good. It might be the human destiny.
Whereas I completely agree with
everything you're saying about the
ambition of
uploading our minds to the cloud.
I want to root for certain kinds of
technological progress and against
others.
But am I not allowed to do that? If I
like Elon Musk's rockets,
am I hastening the uploading of my
consciousness into some kind of
hell, effectively? It's a good question,
isn't it? I mean, I'm, you know, I'm not
with you on the rockets. I think we
should stay here and
>> You're very Yeah, you're very
anti-space.
>> We should stay here and let because
there's something about boys with toys
here, right? There's something about
these guys, "Guys, isn't it so cool? We
can go into space. We're going to
terraform Mars. We're going to mine the
asteroids." But they haven't changed the
they haven't changed the mindset that's
actually been so destructive here. So,
what are we going to do? We're going to
go and terraform Mars. We're going to
live there, create a new planet to live
on because we've wrecked this one and
I'm sure we're not going to end up doing
exactly the same thing. Instead of
actually instead of going on an outer
journey all the time, which is what our
culture is so good at, maybe we should
try and go on an inner journey. Because
the thing that we have utterly destroyed
in in Western culture and in including
much of Western Christianity, which is
one of the reasons I'm an Orthodox
Christian,
is the contemplative life. Is the inner
search. Is the inner journey. And
usually those two things balance out.
And I was thinking only yesterday,
actually, about this that maybe a
society which can balance its outer
exploration with its inner exploration
could be a more healthy one. We've
effectively abolished inner exploration
except in a very New Agey, very
individualistic way where we define our
own reality.
And I think that's the same impulse
that leads someone like Elon Musk to
want to put a chip in your brain. Okay,
so he doesn't want to go to Mars, but he
also wants to put a chip in your brain.
These and and and create and and lead
someone like Peter Thiel to create
Palantir which can survey all of human
life from a very
uh very low level and then hand that
information all over to the military. Um
it's the same impulse.
Are we trying to live a life that serves
God and serves the creation of God
and serves human flourishing on that
basis or are we trying to serve
ourselves and our own desire to explore
and create and
get rich and
But our sure but part of our but part of
our desire to explore and create is
God-given and good. Right?
>> is it? Yeah, maybe. What's God-given and
good? This is the question, right? I
mean, everything's God-given, but is it
all good? No. So,
then you have to distinguish between the
good God-given things and the bad ones.
>> Elon Elon Musk converts to Orthodox
Christianity, disappears into a
monastery
for 10 years.
Re-emerges. I thought that was a news
story for a minute.
>> Re-emerges.
I mean, it may it may
I mean, at the moment, I would say Musk
is
is, you know, interested in affiliating
himself with Christianity on
on Twitter, which on X, excuse me.
political level, right?
>> degree short of actual conversion. Um
but Musk does that. Is there a world Put
yourself in God's perspective for a
moment, hubristically, right? Is there a
world where human beings could be worthy
of going to space? Maybe God Maybe God
won't let us succeed
until we have a kind of cultural
conversion.
Well, uh the question is what Musk wants
to do when he comes out of the
monastery, right? He's not going to want
to do the same thing.
>> I don't expect you'll trust it. If he
comes out of the monastery and says,
"We're still going to Mars."
>> I think yeah,
I was right about everything then
probably he hasn't
Yeah, look,
I don't know the answer to that. Who
knows what God's purpose is for us, but
I see something intensely sacrilegious
and self-centered and anti-nature and
anti-culture in the direction that we're
going in at the moment. We're a society
which believes all limits exist to be
broken. Okay, culturally, socially,
ecologically, technologically, if we see
a limit, we just break it. We don't have
any sense that there is anything that
holds us together.
Um and if we don't rediscover that,
then it's going to be boys with toys all
the way down. And some of the toys the
boys will build might be fun and useful,
and many of them will be massively
destructive. And I think that because we
have the same
um ruthless limitless vision of
progress, those two things go together.
That's the way I see it at the moment.
Right. But maybe you'd trust the culture
of the High Middle Ages with
vaccines and rocket ships, or maybe just
the vaccines.
>> that's kind of like a steampunk novel
that maybe I need to write next.
>> Maybe maybe Well, maybe [laughter] it is
So, let's let's let's end Well,
cuz Cuz Well, let's let's end
with a novel that you have written.
Um
called Alexandria,
which came out in 2020, 2020. Yes. Right
in the middle of the pandemic.
>> So, [clears throat]
I've been sort of pushing you to
sort of define the apocalypse, right?
That's a novel about about an
apocalypse. It's set around the year
3000 AD, right? 1000 years in the
future. And it's a world where basically
both strands of your dark vision have
sort of come to pass. There's been
ecological catastrophe of some kind.
And in part, I guess, to escape the
ecological catastrophe, human beings
have made a deal with a kind of
AI mind that they think they've created,
but maybe they've summoned. And they've
all uploaded Everybody's uploaded their
minds to this virtual city called
Alexandria that
um
may or may not be a paradise. Except,
there's a really small number of people
who have chosen not to and who live uh
sort of
deeply pre-modern existence uh on the
fringes of what used to be the British
Isles. And the story is mostly about
them.
I found this book very depressing.
>> [laughter]
>> No, but not only because Not not only
because I found that choice depressing.
I want to stipulate for the record, on
camera, I will never upload my mind to
the cloud. I will refuse Alexandria, no
matter what terms are offered.
But I'm not going to live a pre-modern
life. The pre-modern life depicted in
the book is authentically pre-modern and
therefore, to my mind, deeply
unattractive and indeed terrifying.
There are billions and billions of
people
on planet Earth living in the machine,
as you as you describe it.
What are they
to do?
8 billion people are not going to move
to County Galway. And if they did, it
would be terrible, right?
So, what do they do?
One of the poems I start the book with
is by Robinson Jeffers, great
Californian poet.
>> Very dark poet, I have to say.
Very dark poet, not an optimist.
>> Not an optimist, but he has this poem
about a purse seine fishing net closing
around a a group of fish that he's
watching from a cliff in California. And
he sees that as a kind of story for
where we are in the culture. So,
interestingly, what I'm trying to do
with Alexandria is exactly play out this
debate and take it to its extremes.
And say, "What would actually happen if
you had this choice?" And what would be
the upsides and the downsides, the dark
sides and the light sides of both of
those choices. So, I'm trying to kind of
play out a debate there.
As you say, most people are Most of the
world is living in cities now. We're all
in the technological system, even if we
live out in County Galway, we're still
on the internet. Um that's how it works.
Sometimes they even make you go on book
tour. Sometimes they even make you go on
book tours, on planes. Um there's no way
of escaping it, right? It's not I mean,
I know people who live in
off-grid cabins with no running water
and no electricity. Um
they still haven't escaped the machine.
They still have to have a bank account.
They still It's So, there's
asking yourself if you can step outside
the system is almost the wrong question.
The question is what relationship you
can have with it and where you can draw
your lines.
What you want to do with technology and
what you want it to do with you. And if
you don't define your relationship with
the machine, it defines it for you. And
that's true of all of us. Um and we can
be different degrees inside and outside
the system maybe, depending on where we
are. There are levels of relationship.
But it's a time when we're all caught up
in this thing. It's been building up for
a long time. I don't know where it's
going, but I do know that if we're
asking who our technology serves and
what relationship we want to have with
the system, then at least we've got some
kind of chance
of living a human life in a time which I
think
is going to be There's going to be more
pressure
on the simple reality of actually being
human than there's ever been before.
On on that theme,
um
the last question is similar to one I
actually asked Thiel.
In the end,
God will not abandon us to the machine,
right?
Which is without wanting to spoil the
end of the book.
>> [laughter]
>> Yes. The end of the book is not
depressing. Not to me. The end of the
book is actually I mean, it's it's open,
but it's actually it's it's very much
the opposite of depressing. Something
quite transcendent happens.
Yeah, I mean, look, if you're a
Christian, you know what happens at the
end anyway, right? Christ is already
overcome the world. So, we have to be of
good cheer throughout the age of the
machine. My favorite line in the whole
Bible, be of good cheer for I've
overcome the world.
Um
so, what we have to do as we live in
this world at this particular time of
challenge, and history has given
Christians and others plenty of times of
challenge and horror and difficulty,
is try to live our faith through it and
try to remain human through it.
The difference One of the many
differences I'm sure between me and
Peter Thiel is we probably have a very
different idea of what it means to be
human and what God actually means by
that. Um and what our relationship to to
nature and culture should be.
We're living in a time in which our
traditional notions of humanity have
been challenged more than ever. That's
very difficult, but it's also an
opportunity to actually
look at what we think is true, what we
think is good, what we think is real,
what we think it means to be human, what
we think a good human society looks
like. But in the meantime, I think that
standing up against this progressive
spiritual dehumanization, which is what
technology is giving us at the moment,
is quite imperative. You've got your
lines. You're not going to upload your
mind.
>> [laughter]
>> I I'm I'm pre-committed. I think I I
think that's good. You know, we This is
the
This is the place we're going to be at
in a few years if we're not there
already, asking ourselves what our lines
are
and what we are as human beings. And
that gives us, as I say, an opportunity
to ask ourselves what it actually means
to be human.
Um which is maybe a question we've never
been asked before in this context, but
it's the time we have to ask it now.
Paul Kingsnorth, thanks for joining me.
Thank you.
>> [music]